Introduction
------------

This Java tutorial series will help you get started learning Java programming from the basics. 
It covers most of the aspects of Java programming language used by a novice programmer. Begining
with the history of the evolution of Java, it moves on to describe the various features of Java, 
which would help you learn to write efficient application program.

Java is robust technology widely used to develop application software.

### Audience
This Java tutorial series has been designed for those who want to learn Java programming; whether 
you are beginners or experts, tutorials are intended to cover basic concepts straight forwardly 
and systematically.

### Required Knowledge
Basic Knowledge of C Programming and C++ will help you to understand Java Programming quickly, and
If you don't know programming and you are studying Java, so it's quite complicated.

### Java Example
A quick look at the example of Hello Java program and the detailed description is given in Java 
Program Structure page.
Example:
    public class Hello{   
        public static void main(String[] args)    {
            System.out.println("Hello Java");  
        }
    }
Program Output:
    Hello Java
The above example has been used to print Hello Java text on the screen.

Java is an object-oriented programming language with its runtime environment. It is a combination of 
features of C and C++with some essential additional concepts. Java is well suited for both standalone 
and web application development and is designed to provide solutions to most of the problems faced by
users of the internet era.

### What is Java?
* Java is an object-oriented programming language developed by Sun Microsystems, and it was released 
in 1995.
* James Gosling initially developed Java in Sun Microsystems (which was later merged with Oracle 
Corporation).
* Java is a set of features of C and C++. It has obtained its format from C, and OOP features from C++.
* Java programs are platform independent which means they can be run on any operating system with any 
processor as long as the Java interpreter is available on that system.
* Java code that runs on one platform does not need to be recompiled to run on another platform; it's
called write once, run anywhere(WORA).
* Java Virtual Machine (JVM) executes Java code, but it has been written in platform-specific 
languages such as C/C++/ASM, etc. JVM is not written in Java and hence cannot be platform independent, 
and Java interpreter is a part of JVM.

### Where is Java being Used?
Earlier Java was only used to design and program small computing devices, but it was later adopted as one 
of the platform-independent programming languages, and now according to Sun, 3 billion devices run Java.

Java is one of the most important programming languages in today's IT industries.
* JSP - In Java, JSP (Java Server Pages) is used to create dynamic web pages, such as in PHP and ASP.
* Applets - Applets are another type of Java programs that are implemented on Internet browsers and 
are always run as part of a web document.
* J2EE - Java 2 Enterprise Edition is a platform-independent environment that is a set of different 
protocols and APIs and is used by various organizations to transfer data between each other.
* JavaBeans - This is a set of reusable software components that can be easily used to create new 
and advanced applications.
* Mobile - In addition to the above technology, Java is widely used in mobile devices nowadays, 
many types of games and applications are being made in Java.

### Types of Java Applications
1. Web Application - Java is used to create server-side web applications. Currently, Servlet, JSP, 
Struts, JSF, etc. technologies are used.
1. Standalone Application - It is also known as the desktop application or window-based application.
An application that we need to install on every machine or server such as media player, antivirus,
etc. AWT and Swing are used in java for creating standalone applications.
1. Enterprise Application - An application that is distributed in nature, such as banking applications,
etc. It has the advantage of high-level security, load balancing, and clustering. In Java, EJB is used 
for creating enterprise applications.
1. Mobile Application - Java is used to create application software for mobile devices. Currently, 
Java ME is used for building applications for small devices, and also Java is a programming language 
for Google Android application development.

### Features of Java
* Object-Oriented - Java supports the features of object-oriented programming. Its object model is 
simple and easy to expand.
* Platform independent - C and C++ are platform dependency languages hence the application programs 
written in one Operating system cannot run in any other Operating system, but in platform independence 
language like Java application programs written in one Operating system can able to run on any Operating 
system.
* Simple - Java has included many features of C / C ++, which makes it easy to understand.
* Secure - Java provides a wide range of protection from viruses and malicious programs.  It ensures 
that there will be no damage and no security will be broken.
* Portable - Java provides us with the concept of portability. Running the same program with Java on 
different platforms is possible.
* Robust - During the development of the program, it helps us to find possible mistakes as soon as 
possible.
* Multi-threaded - The multithreading programming feature in Java allows you to write a program that
performs several different tasks simultaneously.
* Distributed - Java is designed for distributed Internet environments as it manages the TCP/IP protocol.

Popular Java Editors
You will need a text editor to write Java programs. There is even more sophisticated IDE available in
the market. But for now, you can consider one of the following:
* Notepad - On Windows machine, you can use any simple text editor like Notepad (Recommended for this
tutorial), TextPad.
* Netbeans - is a Java IDE that is open source and free which can be downloaded from 
http://www.netbeans.org/index.html
* Eclipse - is an integrated development environment used in computer programming, and one of the most 
widely used Java IDE. It contains a base workspace and an extensible plug-in system for customizing the 
environment. http://www.eclipse.org/
* IntelliJ IDEA - is a Java integrated development environment for developing computer software. It is 
developed by JetBrains, and is available as an Apache 2 Licensed community edition, and in a proprietary 
commercial edition. Both can be used for commercial development.
https://www.jetbrains.com/

Here are few other related articles for you to read:
* Difference Between Object-oriented Programming Language and Object-based Programming Language?
* What Is "Write Once and Run Anywhere" Feature of Java?

The development of each programming language is based on a fact: there is a need to solve a problem 
that was not resolved by previous programming languages. Early programmers had to choose different 
programming languages, usually for various tasks, such as a specific language for a type of field. 
A certain language was sufficient to solve the problems of its field but was not able to solve the
problems of other fields. For example, Fortran could have been used to write efficient programs for 
scientific problems, but it was not good for system code. Similarly, Basic was easy to understand 
but was not robust to write big programs; While the assembly language was powerful for writing
efficient programs, but it was not easy to remember and execution.

Programming languages such as Cobol, Fortran do not have structural principles. They use the Goto 
statement to control the flow of the program. Therefore, programs using this type of code are made up 
of many jumps and conditional statements that make it difficult to understand.

Therefore, C was invented in 1970, to replace the assembly language and to create a structured, effective 
and high-level language. The development of C was the result of the development process started with 
BCPL by Dennis Ritchie. BCPL is an old language developed by Martin Richard. Ken Thompson developed a
language called B, which was influenced by BCPL. C is a processor-oriented programming language; it
is easy to execute and understand. C became quite famous at that time because it was reliable, simple
and easy to use.

Though C was a quite efficient and successful programming language, the complexity of the program was
seeking more efficient language to solve problems. When we write a program in C, it has a limit, such
as a maximum of 25000 lines of code, beyond which it can not handle the complexity. But writing and
managing large programs was a demand at that time. So a new concept came. C++ came with object-oriented 
programming features. C++ is the extension of C language which has been used extensively. It is a 
powerful modern language that includes the power and simplicity of C and the characteristics of OOP. 
C++ provides more functional software benefits than C.
C ++ with OOP became quite famous but then a new problem arose, to control the software on different
machines, a separate compiler is required for that CPU. But building a C++ compiler was quite expensive. 
Therefore, an efficient and easy solution was needed, and this requirement became the reason for the 
creation of Java, which is a portable and platform-independent language.


History of Java programming language is usually associated with origin predates of the web. James Gosling,
Patrick Naughton, Chris Warth, Mike Sheridan, and Ed Frank initiated the Java language project in June 1991.
The idea was to develop a language which was platform-independent and which could create embedded software
for consumer electronic devices. It took 18 months to develop and had an initial name as Oak which was
renamed to Java in 1995, due to copyright issues.

Java originally developed by James Gosling at Sun Microsystems(which has since merged into Oracle 
Corporation) and released in 1995. JDK 1.0 released in(January 23, 1996).

Java SE 10 is a current stable release of Java, and many other previous Java versions are also available.
Java Version | Release History
------------ | ---------------
Version | Released on
JDK1.0 | 23 Jan 1996
JDK1.1 | 19 Feb 1997
J2SE 1.2 | 8 Dec 1998
J2SE 1.3 | 8 May 2000
J2SE 1.4 | 6 Feb 2002
J2SE 5.0 | 30 Sept 2004
Java SE 6 | 11 Dec 2006
Java SE 7.0 | 28 July 2011
Java SE 8.0 | 18 March 2014
Java SE 9.0 | Sept 2017
Java SE 10 (18.3) | 2018

It is necessary to know the exact structure of the Java program, and this lesson contains a detailed 
description of it. This lesson is essential for you before proceeding to learn more advanced lessons 
of Java programming. Here, in this chapter, you will study the structure of the Java program. Such as
how to create a simple Java program and what its different sections mean.

Java program structure means - the way to write a java program or general format.

Basic Structure of Java Programs
A Java program involves the following sections:
* Documentation Section
* Package Statement
* Import Statements
* Interface Statement
* Class Definition
* Main Method Class

#### Main Method Definition

Section	Description
Documentation Section	You can write a comment in this section. Comments are beneficial for the 
programmer because they help them understand the code. These are optional, but we suggest you use
them because they are useful to understand the operation of the program, so you must write comments 
within the program.

Package statement	You can create a package with any name. A package is a group of classes that 
are defined by a name. That is, if you want to declare many classes within one element, then you 
can declare it within a package. It is an optional part of the program, i.e., if you do not want to 
declare any package, then there will be no problem with it, and you will not get any errors. Here, 
the package is a keyword that tells the compiler that package has been created.
It is declared as:
package package_name;

Import statements	This line indicates that if you want to use a class of another package, then you
can do this by importing it directly into your program.
Example:
import calc.add;

Interface statement	Interfaces are like a class that includes a group of method declarations. It's 
an optional section and can be used when programmers want to implement multiple inheritances within 
a program.

Class Definition	A Java program may contain several class definitions. Classes are the main and 
essential elements of any Java program.

Main Method Class	Every Java stand-alone program requires the main method as the starting point 
of the program. This is an essential part of a Java program. There may be many classes in a Java 
program, and only one class defines the main method. Methods contain data type declaration and 
executable statements.

Here is an example of the Hello Java program to understand the class structure and features. There 
are a few lines in the program, and the primary task of the program is to print Hello Java text on
the screen.
A Simple Java Program to Print "Hello Java"
Example:
//Name of this file will be "Hello.java"

public class Hello{   
    /* Author: Shantanu Sikdar
    Date: 2018-04-28
    Description:
    Writes the words "Hello  Shantanu Sikdar" on the screen */
    public static void main(String[] args){
        System.out.println("Hello Shantanu Sikdar");  
    }
}
Program Output:
Hello Shantanu Sikdar
Here are the most important points to note about the Java programs:
* You have to keep in mind that, Java code is case sensitive.
* To write a Java program, you must have to define class first.
* The name of the class in Java (which holds the main method) is the name of the Java program, and 
the same name will be given in the filename. As mentioned above in the sample program; The name of
the class is "Hello" in which the main method is, then this file will be named "Hello.Java".

Let's Look into Various Parts of the Above Java Program
public class Hello	
* This creates a class called Hello.
* All class names must start with a capital letter.
* The public word means that it is accessible from any other classes.

/* Comments */	The compiler ignores comment block. Comment can be used anywhere in the program to add
info about the program or code block, which will be helpful for developers to understand the existing 
code in the future easily.
Braces	Two curly brackets {...} are used to group all the commands, so it is known that the commands 
belong to that class or method.
public static void main	
* When the main method is declared public, it means that it can also be used by code outside of 
its class, due to which the main method is declared public.
* The word static used when we want to access a method without creating its object,  as we call 
the main method, before creating any class objects.
* The word void indicates that a method does not return a value. main() is declared as void because
it does not return a value.
* main is a method; this is a starting point of a Java program.

You will notice that the main method code has been moved to some spaces left. It is called indentation
which used to make a program easier to read and understand.

String[] args	It is an array where each element of it is a string, which has been named as "args". 
If your Java program is run through the console, you can pass the input parameter, and main() method 
takes it as input.
System.out.println();	This statement is used to print text on the screen as output, where the
system is a predefined class, and out is an object of the PrintWriter class defined in the system. 
The method println prints the text on the screen with a new line. You can also use print() method 
instead of println() method. All Java statement ends with a semicolon.
