## Java Operators

#### Java Arithmetic Operators

The way we calculate mathematical calculations, in the same way, Java provides arithmetic operators for mathematical operations. It provides operators for all necessary mathematical calculations.

Basic Arithmetic Operators
There are various arithmetic operators used in Java:

Operator | Meaning | Work
-------- | ------- | ----
+| Addition | To add two operands.
-| Subtraction | To subtract two operands.
* | Multiplication | To multiply two operands.
/ | Division | To divide two operands.
% | Modulus | To get the area of the division of two operands.

Arithmetic operators are applied on integer and floating-point and not on boolean types. But you can use them on the characters' because, in Java, Char is sub-set of the integer.

Program to Show Arithmetic Operators Work

	public class ArithmeticOperators {

	 	public static void main(String[] args) {
	  		//Variables Definition and Initialization
	  		int number1 = 12, number2 = 4;

	  		//Addition Operation
	  		int sum = number1 + number2;
	  		System.out.println("Sum is: " + sum);

	  		//Subtraction Operation
	  		int dif = number1 - number2;
	  		System.out.println("Difference is : " + dif);

	  		//Multiplication Operation
	  		int mul = number1 * number2;
	  		System.out.println("Multiplied value is : " + mul);

	  		//Division Operation
	  		int div = number1 / number2;
	  		System.out.println("Quotient is : " + div);

	  		//Modulus Operation
	  		int rem = number1 % number2;
	  		System.out.println("Remainder is : " + rem);
	 	}

	}

	Output:
		Sum is: 16
		Difference is : 8
		Multiplied value is : 48
		Quotient is : 3
		Remainder is : 0
    
In Java, unary arithmetic operators are used to increasing or decreasing the value of an operand. Increment operator adds 1 to the value of a variable, whereas the decrement operator decreases a value.

Increment and decrement unary operator works as follows:

	Syntax:
	 val++;
	 ++val;
	 val--;
	 --val;

These two operators have two forms: Postfix and Prefix. Both do increment or decrement in appropriate variables. These two operators can be placed before or after of variables. When it is placed before the variable, it is called prefix. And when it is placed after, it is called postfix.

Following example table, demonstrates the work of Increment and decrement operators with postfix and prefix:

Example | Description
------- | -----------
val = a++; | Store the value of "a" in "val" then increments.
val = a--; | Store the value of "a" in "val" then decrements.
val = ++a; | Increments "a" then store the new value of "a" in "val".
val = --a; | Decrements "a" then store the new value of "a" in "val".

	

#### Program to Show How Assignment Operators Work

	public class UnaryArithmeticOperators {
		public static void main(String[] args) {
	  		int r = 6;
	  		System.out.println("r=: " + r++);
			System.out.println("r=: " + r);

	  		int x = 6;
	  		System.out.println("x=: " + x--);
		  	System.out.println("x=: " + x);

			int y = 6;
		  	System.out.println("y=: " + ++y);

	  		int p = 6;
	  		System.out.println("p=: " + --p);
	 	}
	}

	Output:
		r=: 6
		r=: 7
		x=: 6
		x=: 5
		y=: 7
		p=: 5

## Java Relational Operators

The Java Relational operators compare between operands and determine the relationship between them.

There are six types of relational operators in Java, these are:

Operator | Meaning
-------- | -------
== | Is equal to
!= | Is not equal to
> | Greater than
< | Less than
>= | Greater than or equal to
<= | Less than or equal to

These operators are mainly used when applying control statements in the program.

The output of the relational operator is (true/false) boolean value, and in Java, true or false is a non-numeric value that is not related to zero or one.

	public class RelationalOperators {

		public static void main(String[] args) {

			//Variables Definition and Initialization
			int num1 = 12, num2 = 4;

			//is equal to
			System.out.println("num1 == num2 = " + (num1 == num2) );

			//is not equal to
			System.out.println("num1 != num2 = " + (num1 != num2) );

			//Greater than
			System.out.println("num1 >  num2 = " + (num1 >  num2) );

			//Less than
			System.out.println("num1 <  num2 = " + (num1 <  num2) );

			//Greater than or equal to
			System.out.println("num1 >= num2 = " + (num1 >= num2) );

			//Less than or equal to
			System.out.println("num1 <= num2 = " + (num1 <= num2) );
		}

	}

	Output:
		num1 == num2 = false
		num1 != num2 = true
		num1 >  num2 = true
		num1 <  num2 = false
		num1 >= num2 = true
		num1 <= num2 = false

## Java Logical Operators

The Java Logical Operators work on the Boolean operand. It's also called Boolean logical operators. It operates on two Boolean values, which return Boolean values as a result.

Operator | Meaning | Work
-------- | ------- | ----
&& | Logical AND | If both operands are true then only "logical AND operator" evaluate true.
|| | Logical OR | The logical OR operator is only evaluated as true when one of its operands evaluates true. If either or both expressions evaluate to true, then the result is true.
! | Logical Not | Logical NOT is a Unary Operator, it operates on single operands. It reverses the value of operands, if the value is true, then it gives false, and if it is false, then it gives true.

	public class LogicalOperators {

		public static void main(String[] args) {

			//Variables Definition and Initialization
			boolean bool1 = true, bool2 = false;

			//Logical AND
			System.out.println("bool1 && bool2 = " + (bool1 && bool2));

			//Logical OR
			System.out.println("bool1 || bool2 = " + (bool1 | bool2) );

			//Logical Not
			System.out.println("!(bool1 && bool2) = " + !(bool1 && bool2));
		}
	}

	Output:
		bool1 && bool2 = false
		bool1 || bool2 = true
		!(bool1 && bool2) = true

## Java Bitwise Operators

The Java Bitwise Operators allow access and modification of a particular bit inside a section of the data. It can be applied to integer types and bytes, and cannot be applied to float and double.

Operator | Meaning | Work
-------- | ------- | ----
& | Binary AND Operator | There are two types of AND operators in Java: the logical && and the binary &. Binary & operator work very much the same as logical && operators works, except it works with two bits instead of two expressions. The "Binary AND operator" returns 1 if both operands are equal to 1.
| | Binary OR Operator | Like "AND operators ", Java has two different "OR" operators: the logical || and the binary |. Binary | Operator work similar to logical || operators works, except it, works with two bits instead of two expressions. The "Binary OR operator" returns 1 if one of its operands evaluates as 1. if either or both operands evaluate to 1, the result is 1.
^ | Binary XOR Operator | It stands for "exclusive OR" and means "one or the other", but not both. The "Binary XOR operator" returns 1 if and only if exactly one of its operands is 1. If both operands are 1, or both are 0, then the result is 0.
~ | Binary Complement Operator | 
<< | Binary Left Shift Operator | 
>> | Binary Right Shift Operator | 
>>> | Shift right zero fill operator | 


	public class BitwiseOperators {

		public static void main(String[] args) {

			//Variables Definition and Initialization
			int num1 = 30, num2 = 6, num3 =0;

			//Bitwise AND
			System.out.println("num1 & num2 = " + (num1 & num2));
	
			//Bitwise OR
			System.out.println("num1 | num2 = " + (num1 | num2) );

			//Bitwise XOR
			System.out.println("num1 ^ num2 = " + (num1 ^ num2) );

			//Binary Complement Operator
			System.out.println("~num1 = " + ~num1 );

			//Binary Left Shift Operator
			num3 = num1 <<  2;
			System.out.println("num1 << 1 = " + num3 );

			//Binary Right Shift Operator
			num3 = num1 >>  2;
			System.out.println("num1 >> 1  = " + num3 );
		
			//Shift right zero fill operator
			num3 = num1 >>> 2;
			System.out.println("num1 >>> 1 = " + num3 );
		}
	}

	Output:
		num1 & num2 = 6
		num1 | num2 = 30
		num1 ^ num2 = 24
		~num1 = -31
		num1 << 1 = 120
		num1 >> 1  = 7
		num1 >>> 1 = 7

## Java Assignment Operators

The Java Assignment Operators are used when you want to assign a value to the expression. The assignment operator denoted by the single equal sign =.

In a Java assignment statement, any expression can be on the right side and the left side must be a variable name. For example, this does not mean that "a" is equal to "b", instead, it means assigning the value of 'b' to 'a'. It is as follows:



Syntax:
	variable = expression;

Example:
	int a = 6;
	float b = 6.8F;

Java also has the facility of chain assignment operators, where we can specify a single value for multiple variables.

	public class ChainAssignmentOperators {

		public static void main(String args[]) {
			int a, b, c;
			a = b = c = 100; // set a, b, and c to 100
			System.out.println("a = " + a);
			System.out.println("b = " + b);
			System.out.println("c = " + c);
		}
	}

	Output:
		a = 100
		b = 100
		c = 100
  

## Compound Assignment Operators

Java provides some special Compound Assignment Operators, also known as Shorthand Assignment Operators. It's called shorthand because it provides a short way to assign an expression to a variable.


 
This operator can be used to connect Arithmetic operator with an Assignment operator.

For example, you write a statement:

	a = a+6;
In Java, you can also write the above statement like this:

	a += 6;
There are various compound assignment operators used in Java:

Operator | Meaning
-------- | -------
+= | Increments then assigns
-= | Decrements then assigns
* = | Multiplies then assigns
/= | Divides then assigns
%= | Modulus then assigns
<<= | Binary Left Shift  and assigns
>>= | Binary Right Shift and assigns
>>>= | Shift right zero fill and assigns
&= | Binary AND assigns
^= | Binary exclusive OR and assigns
|= | Binary inclusive OR and assigns
While writing a program, Shorthand Operators saves some time by changing the large forms into shorts; Also, these operators are implemented efficiently by Java runtime system compared to their equivalent large forms.

//Programs to Show How Assignment and Compound Assignment Operators Works
	
	public class CompoundAssignmentOperators {
		public static void main(String[] args) {
		
			//Simple assigns
			byte bt = 24;
			System.out.println("bt: " + bt);
			
			//Increments then assigns
			bt += 10;
			System.out.println("bt: " + bt);
			
			//Decrements then assigns
			bt -= 2;
			System.out.println("bt: " + bt);
			
			//Multiplies then assigns
			bt *= 2;
			System.out.println("bt: " + bt);
			
			//Divides then assigns
			bt /= 2;
			System.out.println("bt: " + bt);
			
			//Modulus then assigns
			bt %= 7;
			System.out.println("bt: " + bt);
			
			//Binary Left Shift  and assigns
			bt <<= 3;
			System.out.println("bt: " + bt);
			
			//Binary Right Shift and assigns
			bt >>= 4;
			System.out.println("bt: " + bt);
			
			//Shift right zero fill and assigns
			bt >>>= 1;
			System.out.println("bt: " + bt);
			
			//Binary AND assigns
			bt &= 4;
			System.out.println("bt: " + bt);
			
			//Binary exclusive OR and assigns
			bt ^= 4;
			System.out.println("bt: " + bt);
			
			//Binary inclusive OR and assigns
			bt |= 4;
			System.out.println("bt: " + bt);
		}
	}

	Output :
		bt: 24
		bt: 34
		bt: 32
		bt: 64
		bt: 32
		bt: 4
		bt: 32
		bt: 2
		bt: 1
		bt: 0
		bt: 4
		bt: 4
	
	
## Java Conditional Operator

The Java Conditional Operator selects one of two expressions for evaluation, which is based on the value of the first operands. It is also called ternary operator because it takes three arguments.


 
The conditional operator is used to handling simple situations in a line.

expression1 ? expression2:expression3;
The above syntax means that if the value given in Expression1 is true, then Expression2 will be evaluated; otherwise, expression3 will be evaluated.

val == 0 ? you are right:you are not right;
	
	public class ConditionalOperator {
		public static void main(String[] args) {
			String out;
			int  a = 6, b = 12;
			out = a==b ? "Yes":"No";
			System.out.println("Ans: "+out);
		}
	}
	Ans: No

In the above example, the condition given in expression1 is false because the value of a is not equal to the value of b.


## Java instanceof Operator
The Java instanceof Operator is used to determining whether this object belongs to this particular (class or subclass or interface) or not.

This operator gives the boolean values such as true or false. If it relates to a specific class, then it returns true as output. Otherwise, it returns false as output.

object-reference instanceof type;
	
	class Animal {}
	
	public class Lion extends Animal {
		public void makeSound() {
			System.out.println("Roar.");
		}
	
		public static void view(Animal c) {
			if (c instanceof Lion) {
				Lion b1 = (Lion) c;
				b1.makeSound();
			}
		}
	
		public static void main(String[] args) {
			Animal c = new Lion();
			Lion.view(c);
		}
	}

	Output:
		Success.
