## Java Data Types

Data types are the means for the tasks related to identifying and assessing the type of data. Java is rich in data types which allows the programmer to select the appropriate type needed to build variables of an application.

#### Why is the Data Type is important

* Every variable in Java has a data type which tells the compiler what type of variable it as and what type of data it is going to store.
* Data type specifies the size and type of values.
* Information is stored in computer memory with different data types.
* Whenever a variable is declared, it becomes necessary to define a data type that what will be the type of data that variable can hold.

#### Data Types available in Java are:

* Primary Data Type

Java supports eight primitive data types: byte, short, int, long, float, double, char and boolean.

These eight data types are further classified into four groups:

1. Integer,
1. Relational Numbers(Floating point)
1. Characters
1. Boolean(Conditional).
1. Non-Primitive Data Types
	Classes, Interface, Arrays, etc.

This article is all about basic primitive data types in Java.

#### Integer Types
Integer is the whole number without any fractional point. It can hold whole numbers such as 196, -52, 4036, etc. Java supports four different types of integers, these are:



Type | Contains | Default | Size | Range
---- | -------- | ------- | ---- | -----
byte | Signed integer | 0 | 8 bit or 1 byte | -27 to 27-1 or -128 to 127
short | Signed integer | 0 | 16 bit or 2 bytes | -215 to 215-1 or -32,768 to 32767
int | Signed integer | 0 | 32 bit or 4 bytes | -231 to 231-1 or -2147,483,648 to 2147,483,647
long | Signed integer | 0 | 64 bit or 8 bytes | -263 to 263-1 or -9223,372,036,854,755,808 to 9223,372,036,854,755,807

#### Relational Numbers
It is used to hold whole numbers containing fractional part such as 36.74, or -23.95 (which are known as floating point constants). There are two types of floating point storage in java. These are:

Type | Contains | Default | Size | Range
---- | -------- | ------- | ---- | -----
float | IEEE 754 floating point single-precision | 0.0f | 32 bit or 4 bytes | ±1.4E-45 to ±3.40282347E+38F
double | IEEE 754 floating point double-precision | 0.0	64 bit or 8 bytes | ±439E-324 to ±1.7976931348623157E+308

#### Characters
It is used to store character constants in memory. Java provides a character data type called char whose type consumes a size of two bytes but can hold only a single character.

Type | Contains | Default | Size | Range
---- | -------- | ------- | ---- | -----
char | Unicode character unsigned | \u0000 | 16 bits or 2 bytes | 0 to 216-1 or \u0000 to \uFFFF

#### Conditional
Boolean type is used to test a particular condition during program execution. Boolean variables can take either true or false and is denoted by the keyword boolean and usually consumes one byte of storage.

Type | Contains | Default | Size | Range
---- | -------- | ------- | ---- | -----
boolean | true or false | false | 1 bit | true or false

#### Data Types and Variable Declarations in Java

	class DataTypes{

		public static void main(String args[]){
			byte byteVar = 5;
			short shortVar = 20;
			int intVar = 30;
			long longVar = 60;
			float floatVar = 20;
			double doubleVar = 20.123;
			boolean booleanVar = true;
			char charVar ='W';

			System.out.println("Value Of byte Variable is " + byteVar);
			System.out.println("Value Of short Variable is " + shortVar);
			System.out.println("Value Of int Variable is " + intVar);
			System.out.println("Value Of long Variable is " + longVar);
			System.out.println("Value Of float Variable is " + floatVar);
			System.out.println("Value Of double Variable is " + doubleVar);
			System.out.println("Value Of boolean Variable is " + booleanVar);
			System.out.println("Value Of char Variable is " + charVar);

		 }

	 }

	 Output:

		Value Of byte Variable is 5
		Value Of short Variable is 20
		Value Of int Variable is 30
		Value Of long Variable is 60
		Value Of float Variable is 20.0
		Value Of double Variable is 20.123
		Value Of boolean Variable is true
		Value Of char Variable is W

## Java Variables

Variables are the identifier of the memory location, which used to save data temporarily for later use in the program. During execution of a program, values can be stored in a variable, and the stored value can be changed. In Java programming, it is necessary to declare the variable before being used.

#### Declarations of Variables in Java
Declaring a variable means what kind of data it will store. Variables display named storage locations, whose values can be changed during the execution of the program. It is the basic unit of storage in a Java program.

Syntax:
	type variable_name;

	type variable_name, variable_name, variable_name;

Here's the meaning of type is a data type. It specifies what type of data the variable will hold.

Example:

	// variable definition
	int    width, height=25;
	char   letter='S';
	float  age, area;
	double d;

#### Initialization of Variables in Java

This means assigning a value to variables. In Java, you can assign a value to variables in two ways:

1. Static - This means that the memory is determined for variables when the program starts.
1. Dynamic - Dynamic means that in Java, you can declare variables anywhere in the program, because when the statement is executed the memory is assigned to them.

Example:
	// actual initialization
	width = 15;
	age = 32.5;

	
The variable name needs to be chosen by the programmer in a meaningful way so that it reflects what it is representing a program.

#### Rules of Declaring variables in Java

* A variable name can consist of Capital letters A-Z, lowercase letters a-z, digits 0-9, and two special characters such as underscore and dollar Sign.
* The first character must be a letter.
* Blank spaces cannot be used in variable names.
* Java keywords cannot be used as variable names.
* Variable names are case-sensitive.

#### Scope of Variables in Java
Variable Scope means - That limit, as far as the variable can be used.

In Java there are various types of variable scope:

	* Local variables
	* Instance variables
	* Class/Static variables

#### Local variables
A variable that is declared within the method that is called local variables. It is defined in method or other statements, such as defined and used within the cache block, and outside the block or method, the variable cannot be used.

#### Instance Variable
A non-static variable that is declared within the class but not in the method is called instance variable. Instance variables are related to a specific object; they can access class variables.

#### Class/Static variables
A variable that is declared with static keyword in a class but not in the method is called static or class variable.

Example:

	class A {

		int amount = 100; //instance variable  
		static int pin = 2315; //static variable 

		public static void main(String[] args) {
			int age = 35; //local variable  
		}
	}

Example:

	public class Example {

		int salary; // Instance Variable

		public void show() {
			int value = 2; // Local variable
			value = value + 10;
			System.out.println("The Value is : " + value);
			salary = 10000;
			System.out.println("The salary is : " + salary);
		}

		public static void main(String args[]) {
			Example eg = new Example();
			eg.show();
		}

	}
	

Access control modifier and non-access modifier are two types of modifiers in Java.

There are four access modifiers available in Java, used to set access levels for classes, variable methods and constructor.

Scope only inside the same package (default)
Scope is visible to world (public)
Scope of the package and all subclasses (protected)
Scope only within the classes only (private)

#### Non-Access Modifier

There are five non-access modifiers available in Java, used to achieve many other functionalities.

* Modifier to finalizing the implementations of classes, methods, and variables (final)

Example:

	class Phone{

		final int PRICE_MIN = 999;
		final int PRICE_MAX = 5600;//final variable

		final void display(){//final method	
			System.out.println("Min Price is" + PRICE_MIN);
			System.out.println("Max Price is" + PRICE_MAX );
		}
	}


* Modifier to create class methods and variables (static)

Example:	

	class Programming {

		public static void main(String[] args) {
			display();
		}

		static void display() {
			System.out.println("I love to programming in Java.");
		}

	}

	

* Modifier for creating abstract classes and methods (abstract)
* Modifiers for use in threads (synchronized and volatile)
